---
layout: project
title: Boeing Ethical Analysis (MAE 4300)
description: An ethican analysis of the Boeing 737 MAX 8 Crashes
technologies: 
image: /assets/images/ASME.png
---
On October 29, 2018, Lion Air Flight 610 crashed into the Java Sea off the coast of Indonesia 13 minutes after takeoff, killing all 181 passengers and 8 crew members on board. Five months later, on March 10, 2019, Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302 crashed just six minutes after takeoff, killing all 149 passengers and 8 crew members on board. Both crashes involved a failure in the Maneuvering Characteristics Augmentation System (MCAS), a flight-control system on the recently certified Boeing 737 MAX 8. Despite being aware that the system relied on a single angle of attack sensor and had the ability to send repeated pitch-down inputs, Boeing deliberately chose not to disclose the system’s existence or behavior to pilots and regulators in order to avoid costly simulator training and preserve market competitiveness. As a result, pilots were placed in unrecoverable situations involving a system they did not know existed and did not know how to counteract. Therefore, this loss of 346 human lives was not an unfortunate technical malfunction but a clear failure in engineering ethics and management responsibility. This case represents a clear failure in engineering ethics and must be analyzed to determine how it was allowed to happen and how to ensure that events like it can never happen again.

In order to convince Southwest Airlines to purchase the new 737 MAX 8, Boeing made a costly promise: a $1 million per-aircraft rebate if pilots required additional training to fly the plane. As a result, it was in Boeing’s direct financial interest to keep the flight experience as similar as possible to earlier 737 models. However, Boeing also installed larger, more fuel-efficient engines on the 737 MAX 8, which altered the aircraft’s aerodynamics and introduced a tendency to pitch up at higher angles of attack, significantly changing the pilot experience. To counteract this behavior and preserve handling similarity, Boeing chose to implement MCAS, a system previously used on some military aircraft, to automatically pitch the plane down and make the aircraft fly more like older models. The presence of MCAS, however, introduced a new and safety-critical element of flight control that would ordinarily require pilot training and explicit disclosure. Boeing instead implemented the system while deliberately withholding its existence and functionality in order to avoid triggering training requirements and the associated rebates. In doing so, Boeing directly violated ASME Canon 7, which states that “Engineers shall issue public statements only in an objective and truthful manner and shall avoid any conduct which brings discredit upon the profession.” By misleading key stakeholders, most notably pilots and the FAA, Boeing placed them in a position where, if safety concerns arose, they would lack the knowledge necessary to respond promptly and effectively. Boeing has argued that this decision was justified because MCAS was intended to function as an embedded flight-control system that did not require pilot awareness and because disclosure would have been expensive for shareholders. This is a weak argument as MCAS clearly introduced a system that significantly altered the flight experience. Additionally, Boeing has had a professional relationship with Southwest Airlines from their very first commercial flight, meaning such a large rebate was not necessary for a deal. Therefore, the only ethically defensible course of action would have been to disclose MCAS and accept the consequences, demonstrating that Boeing made the de facto wrong decision.

In addition to not disclosing the presence of MCAS, Boeing also knowingly shipped aircraft equipped with a faulty and inadequately tested system. Boeing was aware that MCAS relied on a single angle-of-attack sensor and had zero redundancies, yet the company did not perform extensive testing to determine how dangerous a sensor failure could be. Test pilots later reported a “culture of pressure inside the company to limit flight testing,” which resulted in Boeing "never flight-test[ing] a scenario in which a broken angle-of-attack sensor triggered MCAS on its own” (https://www.afacwa.org/the_inside_story_of_mcas_seattle_times). This was not a failure scenario that no one could have foreseen; test pilots explicitly questioned how such an obvious angle-of-attack failure case was never tested in flight. This clear and predictable failure scenario was ignored due to negligence and internal pressure. Such conduct violates ASME Canon 1, which states, “Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health, and welfare of the public in the performance of their professional duties.” By releasing an aircraft they knew contained an unsafe system without adequately testing the extent of the danger, Boeing engineers directly put their stakeholders, namely airline passengers, in harm’s way. Boeing has argued that it is impractical to test every possible MCAS failure scenario and that they performed sufficient analysis by classifying minor, major, and hazardous failure conditions and ascertaining that the probability of these events occurring was sufficiently low. However, when Boeing’s own test pilots expressed bewilderment that this specific scenario was never tested, that argument cannot be taken seriously. Therefore, Boeing had an ethical duty to conduct more in-depth testing of MCAS, especially given the fact that they possesed prior knowledge of the system’s inherent flaws.

While the majority of the blame must be placed on Boeing, the FAA’s role in this issue cannot be ignored. The FAA employs a program called Organization Designation Authorization (ODA), under which certain manufacturers are permitted to perform routine certification tasks on behalf of the FAA. This system was intended to improve efficiency as the FAA believed that delegating routine audits would free resources to focus on more complex and critical certifications. However, this exact process enabled Boeing to misrepresent MCAS to the FAA, as the same engineers who designed the system were also responsible for certifying it. Without direct FAA oversight, Boeing was able to conceal both the existence and unsafe behavior of MCAS and certify an aircraft that they knew was flawed while the FAA remained largely unaware. This program directly violates ASME Canons 2 and 4, which state that “Engineers shall perform services only in the areas of their competence” and “Engineers shall act in professional matters for each employer or client as faithful agents or trustees, and shall avoid conflicts of interest.” The Boeing engineers tasked with certification did not possess competence to certify the aircraft and therefore had an obligation to reject the role. Additionally, they suffered a clear conflict of interest where Boeing management pressured them to rapidly certify the aircraft in order to meet business goals while the FAA expected through and ubniased oversight. It is impossible for the engineers to be a faithful agent of both parties simultaneously. This stakeholder conflict between Boeing engineers and the FAA directly contributed to the negligence that enabled both crashes. The FAA has argued that limited resources necessitate reliance on industry experts for routine audits, and while this justification has merit, the ODA system in its current form is fundamentally flawed. A manufacturer should not be able to certify an unsafe aircraft simply by misrepresenting information to its regulator. Therefore, while delegation may still play a role in aircraft certification, full internal regulation cannot continue, and the FAA must assume a more direct and authoritative oversight role.

All of these issues stem from a single but repeated failure on the part of Boeing’s management: the decision to put profit over human lives. In recent years, Boeing cultivated an anti-safety work culture. The company lacked an internal system where the board could receive and address safety concerns, while employees were consistently reprimanded for documenting process violations and encouraged to “work in gray areas." When safety issues were raised, employees were often ignored or reassigned to other departments. Additionally, during internal audits conducted in 2014 and 2017, the board failed to raise safety as a concern even once. Instead, between 2013 and 2018, Boeing spent approximately $41.5 billion on stock buybacks while capital expenditures declined to just 2% of sales (https://www.cpajournal.com/2025/08/12/the-story-of-boeings-failed-corporate-culture-3/). This safety-last culture directly violates ASME Canon 1, which requires engineers to hold the safety, health, and welfare of the public as their highest priority. Boeing not only failed to prioritize safety but actively deprioritized it at the organizational level. While Boeing has brought up the stakeholder conflict between its duty to their shareholders and to its passengers, its decision to prioritize short-term profit ended up undermining both. In the aftermath of the crashes, Boeing lost approximately $32 billion in market capitalization, with its stock price falling from $354.95 before the first crash to $214.08 today. Therefore, both in a business and an ethical sense, the only correct decision is to place human lives ahead of profit.

Even after the fallout from the crashes, the sad reality is that Boeing still maintains a firm grasp on the commercial aircraft industry. As of April 19, 2025, Boeing still held approximately 40% of the market share (https://simpleflying.com/how-airbus-boeing-production-changed-over-past-decade/) and had a backlog of 6,609 aircraft (https://flightplan.forecastinternational.com/2025/12/10/airbus-and-boeing-report-november-2025-commercial-aircraft-orders-and-deliveries/), valued at over $600 billion (https://boeing.mediaroom.com/2025-10-29-Boeing-Reports-Third-Quarter-Results). The commercial airline manufacturing industry is nearly impossible to enter, with Boeing and Airbus accounting for approximately 96% of the global market share. Additionally, Airbus can only manufacture at most around 900 aircraft per year (https://simpleflying.com/how-many-planes-airbus-produce-annually/). Between 2015 and 2024, a total of 13,962 aircraft were ordered, meaning Airbus cannot meet global demand on its own (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Competition_between_Airbus_and_Boeing). As a result, airlines are effectively forced to continue doing business with Boeing, even though doing so violates ASME Canon 6 which states, "Engineers shall associate only with reputable persons or organizations." Therefore, while discontinuing business with Boeing may be the ethically preferable decision, the structure of the aircraft manufacturing industry makes this option largely infeasible.

When designing the 737 MAX 8, Boeing knowingly and willfully lied to the FAA by taking advantage of a flawed ODA program, certifying a system that they knew was faulty and untested before failing to disclose it to regulators, pilots, or airlines. In doing so, they killed 346 innocent people in the name of profit, violating every ethical canon there is. While those lives cannot be brought back, and the structure of the aircraft industry means Boeing cannot receive the punishment that they deserve, we can only hope that these tragic events serve as a grim reminder for future engineers. If more engineers have the courage to speak up, to stand up for what they know is right, then hopefully future events like these can be avoided.
